

³									       ³
³									       ³
³	THE INSTRUMENT TABLE						       ³
³	ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ						       ³
³									       ³
³	This is the table you enter when pressing "M".  You can also use       ³
³	the "L" key to toggle between  this table and the SpFX table. If       ³
³	the table window is not active, it will be made  active (pop-up)       ³
³	before entering the table.					       ³
³									       ³
³	The instrument table  consists	of 400h (1024) instruments, each       ³
³	of 16 bytes in size. The bytes mainly controls the hardware OPL2       ³
³	registers on the card, but I have added a few of my own as well.       ³
³       When an instrument has been defined, use the CXXX command in the       ³
³       sequences to use it.                                                   ³
³									       ³
³       But first, lets have a look at the instrument itself:                  ³
³									       ³
³									       ³
³		FFFF 3F 20 00  FFFF 3F 20 00  01 02 03 04 05 06
	       ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
		   Carrier	 Modulator


	The parameters in both carrier and modulator uses the exact same
	parameters, only the "modulator" part usually changes the  color
	of the sound while the "carrier" changes the volume and pitch. I
	said "usually", because this depends on the way the operators is
	connected. More about this later.

        NOTE: It is wise to leave instrument #0000 at the values defined
        in the example above since this instrument is in fact  used when
        executing a CUT command (6000 in the command column).

	The carrier and modulator parameters will be send to the OPL2 FM
	chip directly, as they are hardware based. Lets  have a  look at
	the parameters individually.


	FFFF	This parameter controls the ADSR of the instrument. Some
		of you already knows what this	means. If you  come from
		the Commodore 64  and have been fiddling with ADSR here,
		all you have to know is that is behaves upside-down - it
		takes FF02 instead of 00FE! Otherwise it is very simple.
		Each nibble ("F", a halfbyte), takes a parameter from 0h
		to Fh, to define four parameters named the Attack, Decay
		Sustain and Release. The attack defines the speed of the
		volume to reach maximum level, Fh is fastest. As soon as
		this level has been reached, the Decay value defines the
		speed of the  volume to reach  the Sustain level. Again,
		Fh is fastest. Sustain is a pseudo-volume level (volume)
		where 0 is loudest. Release again  defines the	speed of
		the volume to go from the Sustain level  to silence. All
		in all, a diagram like this  can be drawn  to illustrate
		the ADSR envelope:


				/\
			       /  \
			      /    \
			     /	    \________________
			    /			     \
			   /			      \
			  /			       \


			  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÙ
			     A	  D	    S	      R


		In the sequence itself, the ADS part of the ADSR will be
		run as soon as the note is triggered, and maintained for
		as long as the HOLD events (+++) are present. As soon as
                the REST events is met (---), the  note releases (R). An
                exception to this rule exists in the instrument however.
                If bit 5 is set to 0 in the  4th/9th byte (the bytes set
                to 20h above), the  Sustain is ignored  and only  an ADR
                is executed. In other words, it ignores the HOLD (+++).

		In the modulator, the ADSR works is a similar way - only
		it affects the modulation instead of the volume.  Use it
		to give "life" to the instrument.


	3F	This parameter is split into bit 0-5 for the main volume
		(level) and bit 6-7 for keyboard scaled level (KSL). The
		level is 00h-3Fh, where 00h is loudest. Add  40h, 80h or
		C0h for three rates of KSL. The KSL defines how much the
		volume decreases  in volume as the notes climbs upwards.
		In other words, the higher the note, the lower the level
		of the note. This feature is not used very often.

		In the modulator part, the level affects the  modulation
		instead of the volume. 00h is full modulation (100%).


	20	This is a multiple purpose register of the FM chip. Bits
		0-3 defines the multiplier, which  works  like an octave
		parameter only it steps in a rather absurd way. With it,
		you can change the pitch without  editing the music - to
		some degree! Bit 4 (add 10h)  sets the KSR - which means
		keyboard scaled rate. It works like KSL only it  affects
		the speed of which the ADSR is processed. The higher the
		note, the faster the ADSR. Bit 5 (add 20h) selects  ADSR
		or only ADR. Normally, you would set this to 1 (ADSR) or
		the HOLD/REST in sequences will be ignored;  notes  will
		release as soon as the note has been triggered. This may
		come in handy at times though. Bit 6 (add 40h) enables a
		hardware vibrato. This vibrato is quite  insufficient at
		times to say the least, so I added my own vibrato to the
		sequence commands (7XYY). Last, bit 7 (add 80h)  enables
		the hardware tremolo. Tremolo vibrates the level - think
		of it as the "Elvis Costello" bit! ;)


        00      Only values  from 00 to 03  is used here (bits 0-1). All
                other bits is ignored. This value  defines the  waveform
                of the operator. If you come from the  Commodore 64 with
                its marvellous SID-chip, you will be disappointed to see
                what waveforms this chip has. They are  not  as flexible
                as the SID-chip waveforms.  00 is a sine and is loudest.
                I have also noticed that waveforms 02 and 03 seems to be
                one octave higher than 00 and 01.  I will try my best to
                draw the waveforms now using the terrible ASCII chars.


                                    ÚÄÄ¿
                                   ÚÙ  À¿
                                   ³    ³
                                  ÚÙ    À¿
                                  ³      ³
                                  ³      ³
                           00  =  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÅÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                                         ³      ³
                                         ³      ³
                                         À¿    ÚÙ
                                          ³    ³
                                          À¿  ÚÙ
                                           ÀÄÄÙ

                                    ÚÄÄ¿
                                   ÚÙ  À¿
                                   ³    ³
                                  ÚÙ    À¿
                                  ³      ³
                                  ³      ³
                           01  =  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ







                                    ÚÄÄ¿   ÚÄÄ¿
                                   ÚÙ  À¿ ÚÙ  À¿
                                   ³    ³ ³    ³
                                  ÚÙ    ÀÂÙ    À¿
                                  ³      ³      ³
                                  ³      ³      ³
                           02  =  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ







                                    ÚÄ¿    ÚÄ¿
                                   ÚÙ ³   ÚÙ ³
                                   ³  ³   ³  ³
                                  ÚÙ  ³  ÚÙ  ³
                                  ³   ³  ³   ³
                                  ³   ³  ³   ³
                           03  =  ÀÄÄÄÁÄÄÁÄÄÄÁÄÄÄ




                This should give you an idea of what the waveforms looks
                like. All waveforms are variations on the sine waveform.


        That concludes the five bytes in each operator, which constructs
        the actual sound. The last 6 bytes in the instrument all behaves
        globally to the instrument.


        01      This is the last hardware register. In bit 0, you define
                the connection of the two operators. Normally it  is set
                to 0 (modulation), but if set to 1 (additive), the modu-
                lator operator will behave exactly as the  carrier. This
                is great for organ sounds! Bits 1-3 defines the feedback
                of the modulation  (0,2,4...E), which is  the number  of
                times the output is fed right back  into the  modulation
                process, creating overtones. If you set it high (E or F)
                you get so many of them that you get...noise! So this is
                the parameter you use the make drums. Again, if you come
                from the Commodore 64 you will be a little disappointed.
                The noise is stuck at a high frequency, and cannot sound
                as good as the noise on the SID-chip. :(  Often drums on
                AdLib can be improved by  using a second voice, in which
                you create a bassdrum-like sine which is sliding down.


        02      This is a software parameter. Use values  00-7F to fine-
                tune the instrument - if you are using two voices on top
                of each other, this may phase the two voices together in
                order to produce a chorus effect.


        03      Hard restart timer value. Defines  the  number of frames
                BEFORE the next note, that the next value below is to be
                processed. 00h turns this OFF. Frames is a  term for the
                smallest timeunit a player can measure, which  of course
                is the number of times the player is called. If the  IRQ
                value is set to 46h, the frame corresponds to 1/70'th of
                a second. Good values are 01-03.


        04      Hard restart Sustain/Release value. When the timer is up
                in the previous byte above, this value  is  put into the
                Sustain/Release on the soundcard for that voice. This is
                useful to "cut down" on a  long release  before the next
                note in a sequence. ADSR usually continues on the Attack
                from whatever point the Release from the last note might
                have reached, but this is not always desirable.  You can
                also use these parameters to make the music more funky.


        05-06   These bytes are unused in player v04.01. Do  not put any
                information into them as they may be used later on. Keep
                them at 00h.


        THE SpFX TABLE
        ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
³
³       This is the table you enter when pressing "K".  You can also use
³       the "L" key to jump between this table and the instrument table.
³       If the table window is not active, it will be made active before
³       entering the table.
³
³       The SpFX (Special Effects) table consists of 800h (2048) effects
³       lines, of 8 bytes in size. When an SpFX has been defined you can
³       use the BXXX command in the sequences to point to it.
³
³       A SpFX "set" may look like this:
³
³
³               0001 0C FF 10 20 0002
³
³
        Let's have a look at these parameters individually.


        0001    This WORD defines the instrument to use for the set. Use
                values 000-3FF. Add with 8000h to use locked frequencies
                with the next byte below.


        0C      Half note value, added to the actual note for as long as
                this "set" lasts. Eg, if the note in the sequence is C-2
                and this value is 02, the note will sound as D-2. If you
                add the WORD value above with 8000h, the values will NOT
                be added. Instead, the values will refer to raw notes as
                if 00h equals C-0, 01 equals C#0 and so forth. When used
                to add the note, the value is signed; 00-7F for positive
                and FF-80 for negative (-01h - -80h). Locked frequencies
                can often be useful for drums which should be unaffected
                by tranpositions.


        FF      New modulator level. The value overrides the 8th byte in
                the instrument. If this value is FF, the 8th byte is NOT
                replaced  and this value will be ignored.  Useful if you
                want to add to the original value in the instrument.


        10      Modulator level add. Added each frame to the 8th byte in
                the instrument, as an alternative to the ADSR modulating
                process. The value is a signed byte; 00-7F for  positive
                and FF-80 for negative (-01h - -80h). Use the byte above
                to set the start modulator level if needed.


        20      Duration. Defines the number of  frames (00-FF)  of this
                set. 00h is ONE frame. When the counting is up, the next
                WORD specifies the next SpFX line to interprete.


        0002    Pointer to next SpFX line. After the duration counter in
                the previous byte  above is up, this WORD  specifies the
                next line to jump to. Values ranges from 0000h-07FFh.


        This table is very useful if you want to make arpeggio or sounds
        with more life than the normal ADSR modulation can give you. Now
        I won't advise you to make arpeggio chords when you have as much
        as 9 voices, but it could come in handy when improving drums. As
        an example, here is the dreaded 0-3-7 arpeggio chord:


                0000: 0001 00 FF 00 0001
                0001: 0001 03 FF 00 0002
                0002: 0001 07 FF 00 0000


        The above example uses instrument #0001 to produce a 0-3-7 chord
        using arpeggio. The duration bytes  are all 00, meaning that the
        arpeggio  will run at the fastest possible speed.  No modulation
        adding is involved. Notice how the pointers makes the three sets
        spin around in an endless loop! Use B000 in  the sequence to try
        out this minor arpeggio chord.












