



³
³       INSTRUCTIONS
³       ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
³
³       In the following chapters I will try to  describe all the things
³       that you really need  to know. I will not go  into detail on how
        to make music, enter notes and build up a tune  from scratch - I
        leave that up to you to  figure that out. If you have previously
        been using trackers, you should have no trouble using my editor.

        During these chapters  I will discuss  the commands available in
        the  tracks and  sequences, the instrument and SpFX tables, keys
        available  in the entire editor - and the command line switches.
        Other things global to the editor will be discussed here.

        While editing tracks, sequences and tables  you can benefit from
        the help window in the lower left corner of the screen. I advise
        you to read this DOC at least once, however.

        All the three-letter box values in the lower right corner of the
        screen will be discussed in the section over keys. The space you
        see above the "Oc?" box (octave) will be ticked  whenever a tune
        has been modified without saving. This way, you can always check
        if it is time to save your tune. However, this version  of EdLib
        does not check the box if you only alter the tables. This is due
        to technical reasons; the table  routines have  been placed in a
        seperate module - and frankly, I was too lazy to fix it! ;)

        The version v04.01 of the player is displayed in the upper right
        corner of the screen. In the subdirectory "PLAYER" you will find
        the file "PLAYER.BIN" which is the actual player. It is possible
        that later  versions of the editor only  requires this player to
        be replaced - in case of player updates only. In the upper right
        corner  you will also find a  tune clock. Useful if you  want to
        measure the exact length of the song.

        When using the load/save requester, all EDL files will be placed
        in a subdirectory called "SONGS". Later I may enhance the editor
        with diretories and path input, but until then you must save and
        load all your songs in this directory. Note that when saving the
        song you can type the new name at the input prompt in the bottom
        of the requester. Songs with the EDL extension has been compres-
        sed to save disk space.












